---
title: Rain
excerpt: I love rain
tag:
- personal
- rain

---
Without realizing it, we are already at the end of 2023. From the beginning of the year, we have lived 2023 with all its stories. I closed my eyes while enjoying my cool room, with the typical dimness of November. It hasn't rained yet today, but I'm sure it will come back to accompany me again.

Hello rain, we met again. I still remember the atmosphere you brought. Being under your gray clouds makes me feel calm. When you fell from that height on me, you remind me that many things in this world will never be the same. If last month we didn't meet and I had to bask under the heat of your brother, the sun, then this month the rain clouds are always above me—cooling the place where I am. If many people can pass by at the roads when you are not around, then when you are present, they all have to take shelter in a safe place, while contemplating something.

If I was 13 the last time we met, I'm now 14 years old. If that time I made a mistake in doing the math final exam essay, then this time I seem to have done the MCQ wrong. If that time, you accompanied me to grieve because I lost my close friend, then this time you calmed my heart which has made peace with my old self. I used to be pessimistic, now I can see the good from the bad.

Rain, you have become a witness to the story of my life. Not just my mine though, you have witnessed the lives of trillions of people who have ever lived on earth. And you will keep coming back every year, maybe for thousands of generations to come. I hope that when people see your puddle, they will be reminded of their story and their amazing life.

Thank you for the soothing voice you sing, the coolness that makes us sleepy, and your contribution to life on earth 🌧️
